I use Vietnam the same way that upside uses suburbia.
I mean, it's not writing about
He's writing about the human heart, and he knows suburbia, and there's certain pressures that accumulate in suburbia, certain pressures that accumulate in war.
And so I used war, Vietnam in particular, as a backdrop for moral choice, a place where the human heart can get squeezed.
The same, I suppose, as Conrad used the ocean.
To call him an ocean rider,
It's a little ridiculous.
They call Shakespeare a king writer.
You have, of course, one novel in particular that you did venture away from.
Was that an experiment for you?
No, that was still on the other side of the coin.
There was a war.
It's a nuclear age, you mean.
A war that everybody hated.
That's a book I kind of like still, but nobody seemed to find it funny, so maybe it's not.
I thought it was funny.
The book that worries me is this one.
It's my best book by far.
You haven't read the final version, unfortunately.
I mean, radically.
I mean, that pissed me off a bit.
They sent out an early version that was done months ago for the ABA.
That's what I bet.
Well, hell, I mean, there were two go-throughs since then.
You know, the things that I did were very important, one of which is to tell a reader on page 30 in a big footnote that if you're looking for solutions, read a different book.
I have one of my notes here.
This is a pure mystery.
Yeah.
A pure mystery.
That's right.
And the purest sense.
And you use that phrase.
I had written it down before.
Yeah.
Before I said it was a book.
And it is.
There's no solution.
A mystery isn't a mystery if it has a solution.
And when you're trying to do literature, you're trying to do what the world is.
And the world is a mystery.
If you've ever solved the problem of love yourself, congratulations, I have it.
Love's a mystery.
Deceit's a mystery.
The things we do for love are mysteries.
What happened to people?
Where's your high school girlfriend now?
What's she doing?
Is she dead?
Married to a stockbroker, happy.
Is she so cute?
So cute?
So vibrant?
Where is she?
Those questions, what happens just after we die?
They're mysteries.
And they're important to the human condition.
Is there a God?
Is he benevolent?
Life is riddled with mystery, and I wanted to write a real mystery, not a fake one.
From the beginning?
Yeah.
That's why the book is structured, if it is.
Why the hell else would I put in hypotheses?
If I knew the answer, there wouldn't be any hypotheses.
Do you know the answer?
No.
If I knew the answer, I wouldn't care.
If you knew the answer, ooh, did Oswald act alone in killing Kennedy?
If we knew... If you wrote a script, you might know.
It wasn't answered very well, yeah.
We wouldn't want to write that script.
It wouldn't be interesting.
In fact, there wouldn't be a movie called JFK.
We would know that, you know, it would be like making a movie of Truman dying, dying of old age.
That's sort of a pseudo answer.
That's a pretty good answer.
You know, it's a pretty good example because the mystery, the reason the movie was made is that it's an example type of hypothesis.
It's one hypothesis.
There are many others.
Aren't there?
Lots of them.
And that's one.
And there always will be.
Same with Amelia Earhart.
We remember things, and we're curious because we don't know.
That's why Lizzie Borden laughed, and why a million other murderers didn't.
Because we don't really know.
O.J.
Simpson, right?
Yeah, there's that mystery.
It's kind of weird that I'm reading this book while this is going on.
This guy does have a modicum of, your man has a modicum of celebrity here.
He doesn't have the demons in his closet that O.J.
does, and we don't know that yet, do we?
That's right, we don't know.
White man's got some demons, but don't we all?
Yeah, don't we all.
They're not on that scale, but... I was taken by a lot of the images that we've heard.
I mean, the pink, of course.
The pink bill, the cover, the pink coat.
And, uh... Let me say, if I'm glad you're in my class in the beginning, I will clean it up.
Well, I know you will.
In Q&A, you'll have to.
Nobody's ever pitched about my interviews.
I'm sure.
You did interrupt this book.
You were working on this and then you stepped away to do the things they carried.
Well, thank God I stepped away.
Tell me a little bit.
You were blocked?
No, I wasn't blocked.
I knew the form was risky.
I knew that evidence and hypothesis was going to piss a lot of readers off.
If that book were written without those two elements, you know, that could be a bestseller, you know, if I had an answer on it.
But I'm not interested in that.
I'm interested in life.
And so I stopped to make my mind up whether I was going to carry through on the risk or not.
I always envisioned the book as a series of hypotheses, no answers, a mixture of real-life testimonies from real politicians, real fillers that me lie.
Do you still believe it's risky?
Yeah.
Wait till the reviews come out.
Some are going to love it, some are going to hate it.
Let's also say, for the record, that as you speak, it's August 3, and the book is still two months away from publication.
The next piece appears in the day, right above the time you go back to Minnesota.
But I already know what's going to happen.
What's going to happen?
I'm going to get great reviews and fabulous reviews, and I'm going to get the worst reviews you can imagine.
But that's cool, isn't it?
Well, it's not so cool if you ask if you're receiving the end of the bad one.
I've already gotten so many responses that I can tell.
Some people say, man, I wanted a book with a solution, and I wanted a book that wasn't going to be interrupted with evidence.
And others say, man, without that, it wouldn't be a very interesting book.
I don't mind the evidence.
In fact, I thought it was a pretty nice device.
That's one of the things I did change, but pretty radically.
I cut back a lot of it.
It was an authorial voice that you do insert.
Now you say you said something on page 30.
I know his arrival on page 21 on the first panel.
And I said, oh, a voice.
A voice coming in from the side here.
Who is this guy?
Page 30, I got blunt.
I mean, I thought, well, why not just say, you know, I put in a lot of stuff in that book saying, you know, the software out there saying there's not going to be any solution to this.
But I wanted to do it bluntly.
So I decided I'm going to put a footnote in there really.
And then the reader, I think it was hard a little bit, the reader said, well, I'm not going to get an answer.
But I don't know.
People, in my opinion,
There's something about what we don't know that both fascinates and irritates us.
That's why we're still interested in, you know, Millier Heart and things like that.
And it's also how the heart is.
You know, the people really love us and how much.
Well, so tell me where this, I know that you've always experimented with forms.
You've always tried to do something different.
Life is a miserable forest.
It's a pageant.
But tell me where this idea came from.
It came out of my heart, as they all do.
I mean, I know.
I know something about secrecy.
I know something about deceit.
I know what I've had to guard in my life, the things that happened to me in Vietnam that I never told anybody and never will.
I've known what it can do to relationships.
I consider the book a love story, basically, about what deceit will do to a human relationship.
It will kill it.
And at the same time, I also feel that there are times in life when you feel so trapped and we all wake up in the middle of the night thinking, man, I wish I never hadn't said that at that cocktail party.
I wish I hadn't done that.
I hope nobody remembers that or finds that out.
Here's a guy that was part of something that was massive for Yale.
And then it occurred to me, I read a couple of books on it, and I worked in the Muay area as a soldier.
You were there about a year afterwards.
About a year afterwards.
I knew the area and knew what I could write about it with.
In my heart.
What was it like a year afterwards?
Was it the Golden Bone or were the demons there?
Carrier than shit.
Scariest place I've ever been.
We hated it.
We were terrified.
You knew what had gone down when you were there?
Found out about it.
nine months into my tour, but first we were just scared of the place, booby-trapped, and gai-hoos, and legs, and people that hated us, and much more than any other part of Vietnam, and when we were told we were going into Pinkville, into the Murai area, we were just terrified, but about nine months into my tour, we found out, hit the papers, and my unit covered the, when we did this security, when the Pierce Commission people came over, you know, we
swept it for the mines and so on.
But it occurred to me that those guys who did that are still among us.
Do their wives know?
How much?
We don't even know their names.
We know maybe five names.
Cali, Medina maybe.
A couple people mightn't remember Medlo's name.
Beyond that, they're all forgotten.
They're all out there in the world.
I was a big grand carrier right here, by the way, about the same time you were there.
Well, you know what I mean.
Those guys are out there.
They're living their lives.
Callie's running a jewelry store down there.
I mean, even with my profound interest in it, I couldn't.
I couldn't either.
So I did the research.
I couldn't.
What do their lives know?
How do they live their lives?
How do they go from day to day?
I know you have put your character in a real situation with Callie.
You've got Rusty Callie there.
I do.
That's the first time that I did that.
Usually I've shied away from it.
I've tried to make up my own Vietnam out of my head and my own imagination.
That's one of the challenges.
That's one of the reasons I stopped for a while thinking, do I have the guts to do this?
And...
Even though he may be an incarnation of evil, perhaps.
Yeah.
But did you still feel, despite that, that you had a responsibility to be fair to his character, considering the fact that he's a real person?
It's like asking when do you have a responsibility to be fair to his character.
I mean, in a way, yeah.
And I tried to be that.
I understand what happened there.
You do?
Sure.
I mean, there's a footnote where I talk about I went through the same damn thing.
Couldn't find the enemy.
They could always find us.
You didn't trust anybody.
You get this frustration builds up.
It turns into rage.
It turns into pistol whipping.
It turns into burning down villages and calling an airstrike if you take a sniper around.
At the same time, even though I understand it, you can't justify it.
still outraged by it.
And the fact that only one person spent a total of, you know, five months in real jail.
One person, five months in jail, 500 people dying.
Enraged.
Yeah, I mean, segments of society were saying, free Cali.
And all these guys, some of them admitted to multiple murders.
You know, in the court of the testimony, nothing happened.
They were, charges were quietly dropped.
They were
Some weren't even prosecuted.
Yeah, that's right.
Cy Hirsch doesn't do it and right now he doesn't write his letter.
You know?
And the last thing is that I felt a little outraged that most of us in Vietnam behaved.
There was a line we didn't cross.
There was a line between frustration and murder.
Well, good and evil, too, I think.
And good and evil.
Yeah.
Good and evil.
It's a battle, isn't it?
Yeah.
It's a morality play.
Well, I tried, Dr. Merrill, I tried in the book to say just kind of why it happened, but it's still evil.
And there's something about those lines about the sunlight.
I believe in that.
Do that again.
Say that again.
Some of the lines about the sunlight and the pink sunlight and the sunlight all throughout the new life, actually, when this is happening, that
We have the whole sun across the universe.
Now and then, evil seems to come like oil through us.
You can smell it and taste it.
I was there enough to know when it was there.
Little coincidences of nature.
What it said one day and what it said the next day.
Then this guy gets killed.
A couple of ambiguous orders are given, and then suddenly you're surrounded by potential for evil.
In a way, I don't want to emphasize this too much.
I think it's mostly a book about, I mean, it's obviously a book about deceit, hiding things, and terror of telling the truth, because you're so terrified of being left.
Being driven to write about these issues on the one hand, and then your responsibilities as a writer to engage and to hold the reader, to perform, to write a story.
How do you, again, that's the risk, I guess, by offering a mystery without a solution.
There is a solution, in a way.
The solution is, we all know.
which is the solution that life gives us almost all the time.
I'll tell you a couple things.
One is that every time you read a real mystery, you know, so-called real mystery, as soon as you find out who'd done it, you know, Jack did it to Jane with a candlestick in the conservatory.
As soon as you read that, you forget.
You can't remember a damn thing about the rest of the book a week later, a day later.
And what we do remember is what we can't quite explain.
We're on a train on a jump under that train.
We know a lot of things we do know, but she's gone.
She can't tell us.
She can't say, I did it for the next reason alone.
It's not that simple.
Lizzie Borden kept shut and mouth shut.
What happens with a little big oil?
They're all gone.
We're not going to know.
That's why we still care about it.
We all knew if a few guys survived, we'd know.
Same with the Alamo.
It's that absence of what keeps us
That's why we have religions.
We don't know it.
What's their last thought?
Yeah.
How long did they live at all?
A while, huh?
I don't know.
They did?
I had no idea.
Yeah.
But no.
Well, they, no, I mean, but their resentment is that they were trying to get things done.
Is that right?
And I think even the other woman, but the guys, you know, they're professional pilots.
They were doing what they could do.
Because that's just what they're training for.
That's a good example, I think.
Those are the things that are engaged.
That's the fascination of Lincoln.
I remember as a kid reading a book by Jim Bishop called The Gay Lincoln Dyer.
You did a Titanic, too.
Yeah, you did a lot of books on it.
One day, and I remember reading that book, and throughout the book there was a sense of, you know, mystery.
Because Bruce was shy, and he could never say anything about how it developed.
Was anybody else involved?
There were theories that Stanton, the Secretary of War was involved, all kinds of weird theories.
Ever since reading that book, I think, and I've always been fascinated by what, I'll never know.
Then you grow up and you start getting into human relationships.
Then those mysteries get really important in life.
People really love us and how much.
And they tell us they do.
Do you believe them?
Why do you believe them?
What are they really thinking?
No, I didn't.
I kept scraps of letters.
Yeah, I had scraps of letters.
Just thought I didn't go into that.
But not much, no.
But I was leading to, I guess I've also suggested that you wouldn't, or you've said that you would not be a writer, had it not been to be a Vietman.
That's true.
And yet, again, it seems almost pedagogical.
I guess you say you don't draw from your own personal experience.
Yeah.
Because you run out of them.
I mean, you run out of them fast in your first book.
Everything that happened to me, I wrote about.
I mean, every damn thing.
If I can remember, I put my very first Mr. War memoirs, a non-fiction book.
And then you get to go deeper.
It's more fun.
You know, you get to write about not what happened, but what could have happened or what should have happened.
Hence, I wrote Cacciato.
You know, I could have walked away from that damn war.
But what stopped me?
I had a rifle.
I had food.
I could get food with a rifle.
It was a hell of a lot less dangerous than staying in Vietnam.
And we used to talk about it.
That's what could have happened.
Maybe should have happened.
I hated the war so much.
Best fiction, I think, is almost always a mixture of the real world with going beyond it into the could ofs and the should ofs and the maybes.
Any book I can think of as any good is that way.
Hamlet.
You start with reality, a real prince, and you take it into another to the imaginative plane, which is why I write fiction.
Are you driven by these stories, and do they come up?
Totally what you described with the Earth at night.
Yeah.
I think three times.
It's actually just set in tight.
Driven by the Earth.
It's just the prose, though.
Yeah.
I mean, things change.
I am driven.
Actually, I'll open an example of the book that won the National Book Award.
I spent six months rewriting the damn thing about, oh, I don't know, three years ago.
Sitting in the galleries, you know, looking into the next paperback edition.
And you find little writing things.
I mean, a lot of them.
And, you know, I saw that guy who teaches a book called me up and said, the student had one edition, he had the other edition.
And they were saying, hey, this isn't the same.
And not many novelists do this, you know, there's a body of opinion across the country.
I know, I asked Bill Kennedy that question.
He issued his first book, The Interrupted, I think.
I said, when they were doing this, were you tempted at all to go in and release it?
No, finished work is finished work.
That's one point in my life.
Henry James, however, when he was four, he wanted to go with it.
Two things.
That's what I quote last night by a poet named Donald Justice who had reissued his poems in a collected version.
He said, I just don't hold with those that you shouldn't play with these things.
That when you find mistakes, you're trying to leave a gift to the world ultimately that's beautiful.
If you find a way to make it more beautiful, you should sure as hell do it.
So you're telling me when that new edition of Cratchito, that book's going to be different?
It's already out.
It's been out for three years.
Four years.
Just flip them in, and that's the book that's going to last, and the one that lasts when you do.
And I read so much better.
I mean, little stupid things I do, like high comma, I mean, that's not the word, but you say something, comma, you smile, small h. Well, you don't smile words.
It's a thing you learn.
You should go, you know, whatever the dialogue is, period, quotation mark, capital H, you smile, period.
You don't smile.
You didn't laugh at the woods.
Yeah.
But even there, yeah, that would be that you could do.
Maybe.
But there are big things, too.
You know, the cartoonish parts of Cacciato I didn't like.
I went overboard.
And it's a hell of a lot better book now.
But you're 20 years older, I think.
Almost.
20 years wiser.
There's a lot of mistakes you make when you're a kid that I wouldn't make now.
I'll tell you that.
I wouldn't be doing, you know.
So the book that won the National Hook Award is different from the one that they authorized.
You bet.
It's a lot better book.
Same with things I carried right now.
Having finished this book, I'm going through it.
And there's a book that was a huge success.
It's taught everywhere.
But I found, I mean, I should have brought a copy to show you.
Yeah.
I mean, paragraphs crossed out.
Things I've got to add.
Lots of changes.
And it'll end up being enough.
You know, I'll flip the changes into the newspaper back.
Do you realize that the first editions of your book make a book?
Good?
Good.
You know, that's good.
I could care less about that.
I care about leaving something beautiful.
I know.
But I do believe in books as being gifts to the world.
And hopefully a hundred years from now, somebody at the library will pick it up.
And if you leave a prettier book and a better-made book,
I think you've answered the question that we asked you to get anyway.
Do you view your writing as a form of exorcism?
But I guess not.
No.
Maybe this book a little bit.
This book a little bit.
More than a little.
This book a lot to be direct.
Other books, no.
But this book about
holding things within and how it can rot and corrupt love and how the absence of openness can be so corrosive to the human spirit but also to whatever exists between a couple of people.
How the pain of discovery of things you didn't know can really cripple a relationship.
And that's what I'm going through now, trying to repair our relationship.
And the things I have never told anybody, including my psychiatrist, about Vietnam, that I can't.
You have a psychiatrist?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Vietnam-related things?
Partly, yeah.
I'm not, I'm not, I don't think I suffer from any disease of any sort, but I do think that I'm, it's like if your dad died from cancer and he never told you he loved you, it's just going to stick with you, you know?
Helps to sort of admit it, and that's kind of what psychiatry is about, sort of admitting things.
They're very hard to admit to yourself that maybe you try to block it out and pretend he loved you and pretend he told you and there's some of that in this book.
So in a lot of ways, yeah, this is the first book I ever wrote where I feel that kind of opened my heart up.
And things that carry different, I mean, I have reasons I know autobiography, kind of, even though it's not difficult.
That's awful right now.
There's a Vietnam gentleman right there now.
Senator Kerry, there's a politician who was in Vietnam.
I thought of him when I was reading your book.
Another guy, he was on track.
You did say that there is a bit of exorcism in this book for you, and I wonder if that may, I'm not asking whether you're exercising anything back at home in your home state, but it is interesting for what you've done, perhaps, that the novel is that the state really grew up.
Well, I mean, I know there's some practical reasons.
I mean, the Lake of the Woods is a
I've never been there, but I know northern Minnesota.
I've been there a lot, you know, as a child and on vacation.
It's a brutal, icy place where you can get lost physically.
Well, first part of the book is an adventure story about the woman who's missing, trying to find her, you know.
It's a place where you can physically have it happen.
Another thing is that at my church there's a lost soul and it goes off and ends up in the verge of madness at the end.
sailing off into the unknown.
It's just kind of how I feel personally.
There is no surprise then here for the leader, is there?
Well, there's a surprise.
There's a surprise.
Some of the leaders are going to be surprised if they didn't find out what happened to her.
But I mean... You know what I mean there?
I'm being ironical.
But you know, I think that I've had enough letters now that I know some people said, thank God it was that way.
And I've had other letters saying, gee, how could you do that to me?
And the answer is you just have to write the best book you can write and let the world, let 100 years from now, all these issues will be solved.
Your book isn't read 100 years from now.
It tells you something.
If it is, that tells you something.
but nothing contemporaneous is really going to mean a whole lot.
Do you feel that you're writing for posterity?
Yeah.
For readers as yet unblocking?
Yeah, I feel like I'm writing for the world, and the world isn't just a very little.
I'm writing for a 19-year-old kid who will go into a library in downtown Minneapolis someday, and
pick the book up and start reading a few pages and decide to check it out and I'm writing for a woman in Sioux City who does the same thing goes in a book and looking for a book in a library and that book is there and you can tell by how even in my lifetime the books that have lasted are
I'm ready to hang it up.
And I don't want you to, I'm not asking for personal matters, but I mean, I'm just,
Tim O'Brien with outside concerns talking about Tim O'Brien.
Tim O'Brien was a bit in... This book, whatever the reviews are, is the best book that I can write.
I can't write a better book.
It's like Michael Jordan did.
He took a lot of shit for it.
But he had to do it.
I don't like that.
I mean, Ted Williams went through the whole list.
You do it for a reason.
You do it when you think you've done the best you can do.
And you do it also because once you've reached a point where you feel like you've fulfilled your reason for doing a thing, and ultimately the reason I've written is to tell the truth, be honest about the world,
And once you run out of things to be truthful about, there are interesting things to say.
I'd rather, you know, sharpen up my golf game.
Spend some more time in Minnesota with my parents.
Yeah, my brother lives in the Twin Cities.
Can you give me some names, by the way?
Yeah, sure.
They live in a town called Worthington.
W-O-R-T-H-I-N-G-A-T-O-N.
Worthington.
Bill and Ava.
My brother's name is AVA.
And Greg is my G-R-E-G.
My brother lives in Egan.
In Egan, Minnesota.
It's a suburb of E-G-A-N.
Suburb of Minneapolis.
You're saving me a lot of time.
I know.
I was a reporter myself.
I know how this works.
I know how it works.
Give me some of the steps you know.
You were born in Minneapolis, by the way?
Born in Austin.
Austin, like Austin, Texas.
I moved to Worthington when I was very young.
Worthington is my hometown.
I don't get back there as much as I want.
I don't get to see my brother as much.
My mom and dad.
My sister just had a mastectomy.
I got to start spending time with that stuff.
I've been so obsessive about writing.
You've been so obsessive about writing.
That's what I mean.
I want to move away.
I don't want to change my mind.
Do you mind if I move the quotes around, by the way?
Are you kidding?
Of course not.
Hell no.
I got an appointment with my girlfriend.
and one o'clock and I'm gonna fucking, I'm gonna be there.
That's what I care about.
I want my, yeah, we'll do that.
I get nervous here.
I did Jim Lee Burke yesterday and I brought him with me in Boston.
He's a nice guy.
He's a good writer, I thought.
I think.
Yeah.
Look, this is what's happening with my wife, you know?
I've lost somebody.
I don't know where she is emotionally and where I'll ever find her again.
Is this for the record now?
Yeah.
I don't know what's going to happen to her.
Will I ever find her again?
I don't know.
Are you talking about your wife?
No, talking about my girlfriend.
I'm getting divorced.
I'm in the process of a divorce whose name is Kate.
It's coincidentally.
Yeah.
That's not really coincidence.
My sister's name is Kathy.
I just chose that because of that.
But there's a reason that there's no answers, because I don't know what the answers are going to be.
I don't know what my own culpability is.
I know some things I'm responsible for, the same way John Wade does.
I also know that I'm with Wade at the end of that book.
I'm skimming off into the unknown.
I don't know what happened, really.
And I want to try to find out the same way he does, and yet maybe I didn't know that murder hypothesis, that boiling, that kind of really hideous scene, that there's a thing called killing logs, and I might have done that.
And those things come out of your life.
Let's talk about a couple of images.
Can I tell you, I just finished writing about Prospero.
We talk about Shakespeare leading him.
He left with the Tempest.
He came back and did a couple of collaborations.
I mean, I think, by far, one of the great, great plays where he left for the stage and Prospero walks out and says, I was a prisoner from crime with pardon me with your indulgence.
You set me free.
Well, you have a beautiful line.
It's better than that, too.
I just watched a version of that with Ephraim Zimbalist Jr.
playing Cospero.
Can you imagine how bad that was?
But it was a great play.
The greatest play ever written, I think.
But he left the stage with that play.
And Chris Crossborough, and I write about this in my book, he is the signature character for Shakespeare.
It's just pertinent to you.
Yeah, it sure is.
For Shakespeare, you see, the creative process was magic.
It was a process that, as he says and as you like it,
the writer's eye in the fire.
And as imagination bodies forth, the forms of things unknown, the poet can... What does he do?
He takes... I'm half asleep right there.
You got him back down pretty damn well.
There's a daughter, by the way.
Okay.
So it's magic.
It's a process of taking... And as imagination bodies forth, the forms of things unknown, the poet's pen takes...
but it turns in here it gives it gives every nothing a local application anyway but it is the same effort i try it it's magic and prospero of course is a magician is a magician i just read a book like francis yates about these cults in the elizabeth world and there were two kinds of magicians there was really interesting
and the good magician.
He is thrown out of the palace, too.
And he leaves, and he takes his daughter, he takes his wand, and he takes his books.
His line was, my library was duking him large enough, because he doesn't pay attention to the affairs of the state.
At the end, he breaks his wand, and he buries his wand and his books, many statues deep in the ground.
I get the point though.
I know where you're going.
Do you want to pick up one?
Yeah, they're good magicians and they're bad.
Nobody else has done it.
I've done a few and nobody else has even come close.
Nobody else even gets it in a way.
There's a reason people
The reason magic fascinates.
That's the mystery we were talking about.
The desire for the supernatural.
It goes beyond just magic.
It goes to things like religion and belief in people.
There's a desire to believe in miracles.
A miracle will save me.
People at Mirai that day, as they were getting shot down, must have been praying for God's intervention.
Some magi coming out and putting an end to it.
There's a line from the book about why Wade is a magician.
What did it mean to take some sovereignty over the world and control the world that's beyond control?
Yeah.
Politicians, not just politicians, but public figures manipulating the world, and sometimes in good ways.
Good magicians trying to make a city into a happier place.
I think FBI was a good magician.
Good magician.
I think.
I really believe.
I think in some ways.
He used a lot of mirrors and smoke.
A lot of mirrors and smoke.
I mean, Johnson, in some ways, tried to be a good magician.
Yeah.
And yet, it's also that business of ultimately, you know, we live in a world where natural magic isn't going to always work.
Kathy Wade was hoping for a miracle, that a marriage would change, that he would change, that they could be open and loving and just have an ordinary little blue house in Victoria in Minneapolis, a child, and a miracle never happened for her.
And he was capable of doing bad magic, manipulating the world, trying to, for good reason,
But with bad results, with bad motives, I mean, bad means.
There's a line, the book is probably the best, the most meaningful line to me, anyway.
You know, something to the effect you have to look up, it's in a chapter called Chapter 3.
It's a two-page chapter where it says, you know,
You do bad things for love.
And he did bad things for love and trying to manipulate and to hide.
Remake himself.
Remake history.
Fool the world.
Fool his own life.
And he put these little elements together with that.
There's a quote from Button Nixon.
This might to me be one of the most evident, where a guy who left for David, who spoke out the Lonely Lady of San Clemente, and he says, maybe, it's a harsh thing to say, but maybe Nixon not only didn't tell the country about Watergate, maybe he never even told his own family, his own wife.
Maybe he fell.
And I can see why he wouldn't.
You know, maybe, I mean,
And knowing his personality was here.
Other things come from Minnesota.
I had dinner with Mondale one night by chance.
I've never met him before or since.
And he's at my alma mater, McAllister College in St.
Paul.
And he sat across the table from me.
And I just asked him about how he felt after getting crushed, you know, by Reagan.
I was writing the book.
And I didn't use anything he told me about, but I used it psychologically.
He said, I was crushed.
I was crushed.
I was, you know, and he retreated to the North.
I think he went, I can't remember where he went exactly.
I think he went to Canada.
I'm not sure.
He could check on it.
He had to get away the same way away he did.
I mean, he was crushed.
And we tend to think of politicians, public figures.
I think they had a prayer.
Yeah.
I mean, Mardale didn't.
That's my question.
He had a wire.
Yeah.
But I think Mondale... I mean, that guy had a wire.
He had a wire until... But, you know, we think of these guys as beyond being crushed.
They can't feel anything.
And defeat and secrets coming out.
Enough of forces come into combination simultaneously.
I'm like, boy, that defeat can do horrid things to the soul.
You know, real horrid things to your soul.
And what happens in love, then it's really horrid.
Did we get all the biographical stuff we need, by the way?
Yeah, went to public schools.
Went to public schools, Macalester College.
Graduated in 68.
Where did you major in?
I was a poli-sci major.
And then you had a full scholarship here.
Yeah, yeah.
Came here.
And you were drafted when?
Jackson is 68.
Surgeon in Vietnam is 69 and 70.
Yeah, my first cruise was 69.
My second cruise was 70.
I went in.
I went to ACS.
You took the extra birth, huh?
I was 18.
And I was on a carrier.
You required an extra year?
Three years.
An extra three years?
No, three years.
Three in total.
Oh, got ya.
He had a company commander who claimed he didn't see any of these 500 bodies.
He found not guilty.
He was there.
They traced his route to the village.
There's a book called Four Hours in My Life.
Take a look at it.
It's a great book written by a couple of English guys who did a documentary.
About a year or so ago?
About a year.
I have it.
I have the shelf on me.
I mean, you should use it.
And all these other guys, I mean, Meadlow.
Remember the testimony?
There's a piece of evidence in that book where they talk about the babies, and they were about to execute a counterbalance maneuver.
Unbelievable.
I mean, unbelievable.
Well, Kelly, I didn't discriminate, sir.
Yeah, I didn't discriminate.
They were all the enemy.
A little two-year-old baby.
That's the enemy.
It's not just those.
I mean, there's all these other guys.
A guy named Donald Simpson.
He was interviewed on TV.
It was horrid to watch, and he felt horrid about it.
But he said I was personally responsible for killing 25 people and cutting off ears, scalping them, shooting them.
just while we're being prosecuted.
It's horrid to watch him.
It's like a total basket case.
And I was shaking on TV and holding chills behind him.
And one day his own son, I can't remember exactly how it happened, was killed outside.
And he ran out and he looked at the sky and pulled up his kidneys on and said, this is God's revenge.
You read about these people out there among us.
And it wasn't just Cali.
It wasn't just Cali.
But I think that that was probably the worst atrocity of the war, though.
Do you think that's so, or do you think there were worse ones?
I don't think there were worse, no.
I think that was one of the things people were trying to say at the time.
I never saw anything like it.
No.
And I don't think... I don't either.
But I will say this.
America has a way of forgetting its errors.
They don't fit into our grand national mythology.
what we did to the Indians.
What happened, we're there.
Evil doesn't fit in, and we just pat our bath salts in the back, and think of America the White Knight, America the Lone Ranger, America's laser-guided weaponry beating up on Saddam and his legion of evil, devils.
Yeah, still not.
For some reason, we have a way of not fitting evil into our own history, and we've got to learn to do it.
We're not gods.
Did we answer the magic question satisfactorily?
Is this something, by the way, that you were fascinated with as a kid?
Totally.
Yeah, I was a magician as a kid.
That was my hobby.
That was stuff alone in the basement.
You went to the basement.
Yeah, I was a lonely... Did your father give you a hard time about that?
No, he didn't give me a hard time about that.
My father was a good guy, and he got me into books.
Oh, this guy's a good guy, too.
In a lot of ways, yeah.
And...
But I was a lonely, chubby kid.
You were chubby as well?
Yeah.
I didn't have a lot of friends.
I was a reader.
In Worthington, Minnesota, you know, you give a shit about books, you're not exactly the most popular person.
So a lot of that loneliness and living alone and wanting to manipulate the world and make good things happen comes from my life.
What's the gliding theme?
Is that just something that came in?
The theme that comes from a thing that happened to me in Vietnam that I can't talk about.
Really?
They hit one there.
Just a stunted thing happened and my body went into a glide and partly I was full of rage.
I had a guy dying and partly I was not myself anymore.
I was a nerd person.
Good magic, bad magic.
Right.
There is good magic.
There's a thing called love.
Love is a kind of magic, and it can be good, too.
Ah.
It is.
I mean, the irony is so overwhelming.
Isn't that they can make villages disappear?
Yeah.
That's one of the great Shakespearean themes is illusion and reality.
That's what America did with Vietnam.
We made Muay disappear.
But of course he couldn't make the things that really matter appear.
That's right.
He can just temporarily make it racist from our consciousness.
That's the way he did.
He could forget it for 20 years and try to.
Now and then those things will come back.
And then, of course, the ultimate disappearance, which is just a little mystery.
I mean, you look for the cruelest irony of love.
That's that.
When you suddenly wake up and the person you've been madly in love with, you've been doing all your tricks for, gone from your life and gone forever, and you don't know what happened.
And if you ever get her back or... We all do that.
When your dad dies or something, you know, where'd he go?
What were his last thoughts?
Do you really love me?
What would you have said if I said I love you on the death side of those things?
We'll never know.
I think that your imagery and the writing on the combat scenes are still some of the most powerful.
Whether you read the final version of the book, you're going to be astounded at the difference.
You can't let it go, can you?
This book, I've been working on it.
Are you still working on it or is it healthy enough?
Are you going to write with me the phone I just finished?
This book?
Yeah.
I worked on it until five days ago, six days ago.
That book is... They weren't too thrilled.
They were a little... The copy editor is a great guy, but he was getting a little tired of me calling in changes.
That's why I'm into the major papers.
I made them... I insisted that they... I was so pissed, you know.
Now, what were you pissed about?
Well, you don't want a book to go out there until it's done.
That book was reviewed on the basis of something that was done, like, four months ago, three months ago.
It's not fair.
And P.W.
and so on.
And book lists, I made sure they got the finished book.
I made damn sure.
I made a list of the big papers in the country in the important place.
You can send the bound galley, but you're also going to send your final pages.
It's not good to a writer when you're working that hard.
to make a good block, not to have the de-block reviewed.
And then they can make their minds up.
It shouldn't be sent out.
That thing was made for the convention, and it wasn't made for sending out to reviewers.
It was a 3,000 question or whatever.
I thought, my understanding was going to booksellers.
I know.
But you're learning.
It's not Hosen's fault.
I just didn't know what was going on.
I mean, that was naive.
I think when you read the book, you're going to quit.
I think it is, too.
And I think it's 100 years from now that everybody's going to say, that's why I want to quit writing.
I know life is more important to me.
I want to be happy for a change.
You're still under 50.
Obviously, Vietnam clearly is the event of our generation.
You were debating going to Canada at one point.
What's your feeling retrospectively on that now?
I was a coward.
I should have done what I thought was right.
I'll always feel that way.
I'll get a million letters and I'll always hang out.
That's how I feel.
If you think something's wrong, you shouldn't do it.
So you think then that perhaps... Given what I believe, I should not have gone to that war.
And you think that you shouldn't have been a writer then?
Because you wouldn't have been.
No, I think I should have been a writer.
I mean, that's one of the reasons you become a writer is you do bad things.
You live through tragedy.
You live through your mistakes, and you've got to try to salvage something out of it.
And part of what art is, I think, is salvage some beauty out of the horror.
And I think they're painting Rannica, you know, that great, I mean, ugly event.
But there's some, you rescue beauty.
What Macbeth does, I mean, it rescues beauty out of horror.
Yeah, yeah.
That difference, that line, out, out, I mean, that has to do with a kind of purging of, that line is a beautiful line because it has to do with the human desire to rid itself of evil.
You know that famous line, the word's only been used once in literature, the moltitudinous disease incarnadine.
Like that washes his hands in the ocean, and instead of the green ocean turning his hands,
That's what art does.
I mean, I felt this, you know, this pink, I mean, this isn't just, it's just one of these,
Was it called Peteville because of, I mean, is that just one of these cool... If you look at a map, a military map, it's shaded pink on the map, and it signified a built-up area.
Yeah, but I mean, how appropriately... But the sunlight, I remember the sunlight in the morning, that pink, gorgeous, beautiful sunlight, and the most hideous things happening underneath the sunlight.
You felt that the sunlight was somehow expecting it.
It was, I'll never, I always thought it was called, I told somebody to explain to me, I thought it was called Pinkville because everything became pink.
The soil's red.
I mean, having gone, I just went back there in February and threw me a lie, and I was doing a piece of New York Times Magazine on it, and probably my final overture.
I mean, you're serious about this.
This is not, yeah.
I mean, I'm not saying that maybe 15 years from now I won't,
changed my mind the way Ross did.
He may change his mind.
But for now, I want to be happy and I want to get to know my family better and make my life good.
Now you have no children, I gather.
No.
Can I call you at some point with any additional questions?
Yep, absolutely.
Tell me about that.
I haven't showered.
I don't know.
Every place I go, I get them.
I'm going to change that, though.
That's one of the things I go on the tour.
I've decided that I'm going to... I don't know.
I just decided to make some big changes in my life.
Some of them are small, some of them are big.
I use it because it's like a trademark and because the people are used to it.
If I'm not wearing it, they get pissed at me.
Really?
Yeah.
They say, where's your baseball cap?
Don't you have a picture of your baseball cap?
This isn't going to look right.
That's going to look like you.
But I'm going to check that changing on October 1st when I, my birthday hits when I go on the old, hit the road, this tour.
Yeah.
A lot of other things I'm changing.
I thought I got the patch finally to stop smoking.
I'm going to do that.
A lot of changes I'm going to be making.
You know, it's just things I've written about.
I want to just become a better person without paying attention to people.
I've been so obsessed with writing for so many years, trying to write well, and it's hard for me to make sentences.
Not at all.
I'm tired of it.
And that's why, you know, be a good person.